---
layout: post
title: "From PCA to Hebbian learning"
author: Wayne
date: 2025-12-19
permalink: /posts/12_19_2025_hebbian
description: Statistical learning sharing
published: true
tags:
  - math
  - english
---

### What is PCA?
From the Pattern Recognition and Machine learning:
> Orthogonal projection of the data onto a lower dimensional linear space; linear projection that minimizes the average projection cost. 

### The algebraical connections between PCA and Hebbian learning 

A famous quote for principal of Hebbain learning is that 
>Neurons fire together, wire together. 

It means that when neurons are co-activated, the synaptic weights are strengthened. This simple rule can be written as:
$$
\Delta w = yx
$$
And we know that the activation function for postsynaptic neuron $Y$ can be written as

$$
y = w^\top x
$$
We also know that the covariance of presynaptic neuron $X$ is
$$
\mathbf{C = \mathbb{E}(xx^\top)}
$$

Then, the update of the synaptic weight $w$ can be written in: 
$$
\Delta w = \eta yx = \eta(w^\top x)x
$$

To combine the term, the update of $w$ can be written as:
$$
\mathbb{E}(\Delta w) = \eta \mathbf{\mathbb{E}(xx^\top)w} = \eta \mathbf{Cw}
$$

Then there is a question: what's the link between $w$ and the maximum variance direction of the data?

We can write down the expression of the variance first (for 0 mean, $\mathbb{E}[x]=0$): 
$$
\begin{align}
Var(Y) = \mathbb{E}(Y^2) - (\mathbb{E}Y)^2 \\ = \mathbb{E}\mathbf{(w^\top x)^2} \\ = \mathbb{E}\mathbf{(w^\top x x^\top w)} \\ = \mathbf{w^\top C w} 
\end{align}
$$

The covariance matrix $C$ can be decomposed as:

$$
C = V \Lambda V^\top
$$

This equation works because $C$ is a symmetric matrix. The matrix $V$ is the collection of basis vector $v$ and $\Lambda$ is the diagonal of scalar values, which represents the much or less variance distribution on different vector $v$. 

The $V$ can be written as:
$$
V =

\begin{bmatrix}

\vert & \vert \\

v_1 & v_2 \\

\vert & \vert

\end{bmatrix}

$$

The $\Lambda$ is:
$$

\Lambda =

\begin{bmatrix}

\lambda_1 & 0 \\

0 & \lambda_2

\end{bmatrix}

$$

To overcome the unbounded growth of Hebbian learning weight, if we add the regularization on $||w||$, we get Oja’s rule:

$$
\Delta w = yx - y^2w
$$

At the equilibrium point ($\Delta w = 0$ ), the weights $w$ stop changing and become

$$
\begin{align}
\mathbb{E}(\Delta w) = 0 \\  \eta \mathbf{Cw}  =  \mathbf{(w^\top C w)w}
\end{align}
$$

To explain the equation  $Cw = \lambda w$ in geometry, it means that covariance matrix project into a unit vector $w$ and it is equivalent to scale up/down along this direction of vector $w$. 

To better understand the relationship why $\lambda = w^\top C w$, there is an easy decomposition on two steps: 
- step 1: $Cw$ is a transformation of covariance matrix. The transformation is to use the data distribution to reshape the vector $w$ to make it a new vector here $v = Cw$. 
- step 2: $w^\top v$, is a projection from previous step 1 transformation back to original direction, to see how much information is lost. If the $w$ is the eigenvector, it captures the maximum possible variance. The $w^\top w = 1$ is the result of normalization. 

>[!faq] Questions?

